part: 1
title: Ways into The Burial of the Dead
---
kind: listen
title: Hear it before you read it
lens: listen
body: Virginia Woolf, who heard Eliot read the poem at dinner in June 1922, wrote in her diary that "he sang it & chanted it rhythmed it." Start with his own voice: the listening room has his recordings. Then read the seventy-six lines silently and notice where his stresses fell.
sources: Woolf, Diary, vol. 2, 23 June 1922
---
kind: lens
title: Count the speakers
lens: voices
body: Switch on Voices and the section splits into ten: the poem's own voice, Marie, a voice in German, a prophet, a sailor and a shepherd from Wagner, a girl with hyacinths, someone who could not speak, a clairvoyante, and a walker in the City. The typescript of this section was headed "He Do the Police in Different Voices", a phrase from Dickens. For each voice, ask whether it is quoting someone else.
sources: Facsimile (1971), the typescript of Part I
Dickens, Our Mutual Friend, bk. I, ch. 16
---
kind: do
title: Turn the tarot cards
lens: cards
body: Madame Sosostris turns up six cards, fails to find a seventh, and reports one vision. Turn them over one at a time on the table and read the note on each. Then ask what she leaves out. The seventh card, the one she cannot find, is the Hanged Man, and the only water in her reading is the kind that drowns: a drowned sailor, and "Fear death by water."
---
kind: map
title: Follow the route in Part I
lens: places
body: Lines 60–68 follow a route: over London Bridge, "up the hill and down King William Street", and past St Mary Woolnoth as its clock strikes nine. It is about half a mile, the way into the City that thousands of clerks walked every morning from London Bridge station. Eliot's bank stood at the end of it, and his note on line 68 calls the dead sound on the final stroke "a phenomenon which I have often noticed". Follow it on the map, then read the lines again with the walk in mind.
sources: Eliot, "What Dante Means to Me" (1950)
T. S. Eliot Foundation, "T. S. Eliot at Lloyds Bank"
---
kind: source
title: Put Chaucer beside it
source: chaucer
body: Read the first twelve lines of the General Prologue, then Eliot's first seven. Both begin with April, with rain, and with roots. Decide what has changed between Chaucer's April and Eliot's.
sources: Chaucer, General Prologue, lines 1–12
---
kind: lens
title: Follow the water
lens: water
body: Part I names water, or the lack of it, again and again: spring rain and forgetful snow in the first seven lines, a shower over the Starnbergersee, a dry stone with no sound of water, a handful of dust, a drowned sailor, and then "Fear death by water." The Water lens tints the lines that name water and the lines that name its absence.
---
kind: path
title: Meet the dead
path: dead
body: The Dead pathway goes through Part I with the sources open beside the lines: Dante's crowd at the gate of Hell and the sighs in Limbo, Webster's dirge, the corpse in Stetson's garden, and the buried god of Frazer's <i>Golden Bough</i>.
---
kind: draft
title: Read what was cut
lens: drafts
body: The section did not begin with April. In the typescript it began with fifty-four lines about a night out in Boston, which were cut. The drafts view shows where the cut fell. Read the cancelled opening and then line 1, and decide what the change did.
sources: Facsimile (1971), the typescript of Part I
Edmund Wilson (1971)
Litz (1973)
---
kind: lens
title: Read it without the translations
lens: tongues
body: Five lines of Wagner (31–34 and 42), a sentence of German at line 12 and a line of French at line 76 are left untranslated. Switch on Tongues to see what they say, then switch it off and read the section as a reader with no German or French would have read it in 1922, hearing those lines without understanding them.
---
kind: ask
title: Three questions with no answer
body: Part I asks questions it does not answer: what roots clutch and what branches grow out of this stony rubbish (19–20); where are you lingering (34, in Wagner's German); has the corpse in the garden begun to sprout (72). One way in is to read the section with those questions open.
