part: 4
title: Ways into Death by Water
---
kind: source
title: Read it in French first
source: dans-le-restaurant
body: The ten lines are Eliot's translation of the last stanza of his own French poem "Dans le Restaurant", published in 1918. Read the French, then the English, and note what was dropped (the tin, Cornwall, the offhand "Figurez-vous donc") and what was added ("Gentile or Jew", and the whole address to the man at the wheel).
sources: The Little Review, September 1918, pp. 12–13
Poems (1920), "Dans le Restaurant"
---
kind: draft
title: The voyage Pound cut
lens: drafts
body: In the typescript this section was a sea voyage of some ninety lines, from the Dry Salvages off Cape Ann to the fishing banks, ending in ice. Pound cut it to the last ten lines and then had to talk Eliot out of cutting those too: "Phlebas is an integral part of the poem . . . Must stay in."
sources: Facsimile (1971), the typescript of Part IV, and p. 129
Pound, Letters, ed. Paige, no. 183
Perloff (1981)
---
kind: path
title: The drowned before Phlebas
path: water
body: Before it reaches Phlebas the poem has warned of drowning and shown the drowned: "Fear death by water" (55); the pearls that were his eyes (48, 125); Ophelia's good night (172), said not long before she drowns; and "the king my brother's wreck" (191). The Water pathway takes them in order.
sources: Shakespeare, The Tempest I.ii
Shakespeare, Hamlet IV.v and IV.vii
---
kind: source
title: Ariel's song
source: shakespeare-tempest
body: "Full fathom five thy father lies." Read Ariel's song, then Phlebas. Shakespeare's drowned man is not in fact drowned, and the song has him suffer "a sea-change / Into something rich and strange". Eliot's Phlebas is a fortnight dead, and the current picks his bones in whispers.
sources: Shakespeare, The Tempest I.ii
---
kind: listen
title: Hear it read
lens: listen
body: Ten lines are short enough to hear several readers one after another. The listening room has six readers of Part IV: Eliot himself (in 1933, and again in the 1940s), Alec Guinness, Jeremy Irons, Fiona Shaw, Edoardo Ballerini and Elizabeth Klett. Start with Eliot's own reading and hear the others against it.
sources: The Poetry Archive
PennSound
---
kind: ask
title: Consider Phlebas
body: "Consider Phlebas, who was once handsome and tall as you." The last three lines turn from the drowned man to whoever is at a ship's wheel, "Gentile or Jew", and through him to the reader. In 1956 Herbert Musurillo compared the section to the epitaphs for drowned sailors in the <i>Greek Anthology</i>, which speak to the sailor passing by. The last line has the shape of the warning on an old gravestone: as you are now, so once was I.
sources: Greek Anthology VII 282
Musurillo (1956)
Deutsch (1952)
